Today we have Ben, we've got Becca, we've got Andy. It's really going to be an awesome team
to highlight what they've done there to focus on training, user adoption, the leadership vision to
incorporate, the open source backbone, also all of the change management that has to go into this,
creating packages, and doing all this phenomenal work. So really excited to bring this webinar
today to you. The work that GSK has done has went over so many boundaries. I mean,
into the community with Caymus, the R validation hub, working on the Pharmaverse and the list goes
on. So it's just amazing to highlight this work today and to hear from this team. And so with
that, I'm going to pass it over to Andy, who's going to kick off the webinar for today.
So thank you, Phil. Thanks for flagging some of that good work. Really nice introduction for us.
And thanks, Posit, for inviting us to present today. We really enjoyed the series and we were
thinking about what we were going to present on. We've really enjoyed the presentations from some
of our industry peers on their work with R and their submissions. But rather today than talk
about the submissions work that GSK has done and the work that they've done, we're going to talk
about the work that GSK has done and what we've done on that small scale. The idea today is to
talk about from pilot projects to enterprise adoption. We want to not just focus on these
really, really nice examples where we get to a submission with a study, but look at what we've
done generally over the last five or six years to get to a point where we are today. I'm going to
start us off today and then give a little bit of that context and background. I'm going to hand
over to Ben and to Becca to come in and give a little bit more details of some of the things
we've done which have really driven that adoption at the enterprise level. With my job of setting
the scene, I guess a good first place to start is with the image that you're seeing in front of you
with the mountains and the base camp. Where we are at today as GSK is probably not base camp,
but maybe some further on camp further high up the mountain. We are not at the point where we've
completed our journey. We're not at the point where we have, I guess, fully 100% succeeded in
rolling out across our organization, but we are very, very near. We put in a lot of effort and,
as Phil's called out, a few of the initiatives that we've been involved in. We've done a lot
to get to this point. That's really the focus of this. It's how we put ourselves in a great position
to make that final push. I do want to warn you there's going to be quite a lot of mountaineering
references throughout this. That's the focus today. How has GSK taken an organization in
biostatistics of over 1,000 people and helped them on their journey to R?
I'm going to take us back about 12 or 14 months, back to August 2023. At this point,
our biostatistics leadership team made some very, very big commitments. The first commitment was
that from that point forward, all central tools that we built would be built using open source
languages. Secondly, that 50% of the code, remember this is 50% of the code from an
organization of 1,000 people that produce code every day, 50% of that code would be open source
by the end of 2025. Now, to really get the impact of those statements, you've got to think where we
were five years ago. Five years ago, in fact, even a year prior to this, none of our central tools
were built using open source languages. Open source was in use, but not for our central tools.
In terms of the code, again, going back five years, maybe 5%, 10% of that code was produced
using open source languages. We've gone from essentially from a position of zero or close to
zero to a point where we were able to, a year ago, make two very, very big and bold statements about
our use of open source tools, particularly the R language moving forward.
Before I get into some of the details, before Ben and Becca come in, just to position this for those
who might be listening who are not from the pharmaceutical industry, you will know that
we deliver medicines and vaccines, and that is a core part of what we're trying to do.
In doing so, we're essentially delivering what's a lot like this rope on the left-hand side.
The rope here for a climber is a key, key part of what a climber needs to climb that wall,
and in trusting that rope, they want to make sure that that rope is going to be safe,
and they want to make sure that rope is going to be effective. They're climbing that wall,
it needs to go smoothly through the Caribbean and so on. They need to know if they fall,
it's going to hold their weight, it's not going to fray over time. It has to be really,
really safe and effective. Delivering medicines and vaccines is very, very similar.
We need to make sure that the medicines and the vaccines that we develop are safe and effective,
and that requires a lot of analysis of the data that we have that we collect from our clinical
studies. If you buy a rope, you go in and you're a climber and you go and buy a rope,
you don't really expect to just take the manufacturer's word for the safety of that
rope. You would hope that at some point, some independent body has assessed the manufacturing
of that rope. They've checked the processes and the way that the process is used by the company
manufacturing the rope to ensure that it's to good standards, that the rope has been thoroughly
tested and been through all of those measures that are going to make it fit for purpose.
Again, linking that back to our industry and how we work, that transparency is also vital for us.
We have regulators like the FDA, the Food and Drug Administration in the USA, and other regulators
throughout the world who are going to check what we do. All of that boils down to a practice where
the reason we have a thousand or so statisticians, programmers, and data scientists is because we
have a lot of work to do to generate our outputs, generate tables, and generate graphics that
demonstrate that the medicines and the vaccines we produce are safe and effective.
There's a lot of work to be done, and importantly, there is not a lot of time to do it.
And like in any job, we need to be fast. But here, bear in mind, we've got patients
around the globe looking for us for new medicines or better medicines than the
standard of care that they have today. There's also the commercial aspect. We want to be ahead
of our competitors. So we have a lot to produce. We don't have a lot of time to produce it in.
Now, ideally, you'd look at this and you think, OK, well, we've got a huge amount of code
to write, a lot of analysis to be done, not a lot of time. It should be the ideal scenario for
innovation. Unfortunately, however, although that can be the case, there is a little bit of
the tendency towards what I call the old boots. So the boots you see on the screen at the moment,
I have a pair like this. I bought or was bought by my parents a pair of boots when I was 14 years
old. I still have them today. I will walk in them. I will garden in them. They're a trusted
pair of boots that I've had for for many, many years. I won't tell you how many years past 14
I am, but it's a long time. Right. And these boots, these boots are great. Now, over time,
they're a bit worn. They're maybe not quite as waterproof as they used to be, but they work
for me. They worked for me last time. Last time I took a hike, they worked. And I expect the next
time they'll broadly work. Now, out there in the market today, there are boots that are lighter.
There are boots that are more waterproof than the boots I have today. Maybe there's better
colors, other design features that could improve on that. But what tends to happen in our industry
is that because it worked well last time, we're a little bit reluctant. People can be a little
bit reluctant to change and upgrade those boots, just like me and my hiking boots.
And when I talk about that upgrade, when we relate this back to languages, we're not just
talking about a migration from one language to another. We're talking about systems, tools,
processes, ways of working that have to change alongside. And that kind of
resistance against shifting is what we're facing with when we try and roll out open source
adoption, particularly our adoption at a company like GSK or any large organization like this.
So, that's the scene a little bit. I'll move on now to just thinking about actually beginning
this journey. What do we need? OK. So, we're going to make an open source journey.
We didn't start in 2023. We started before that. But what got us there? Well, first of all,
we need the right equipment. So, this picture on the left hand side illustrates the kind of
equipment you're going to need for a climb. Yes, there's clearly a lot of things you're going to
need to go mountaineering, to go climbing. But it is also the case that we need the right kind of
tools and the right kind of equipment for an open source journey. We need the standardized central
environments that we can all, that people can log into and use. We need to think about the
management and support of, again, a thousand statisticians, programmers, and data scientists.
But before we even get there, before we build these tools, we have to want to climb the mountain.
And that's potentially obvious. But it's really, really important. You can buy me the rope,
you can buy me the carabiner, the ice axe, the shoes. But unless I really want to go climbing,
they'll just sit in a cupboard somewhere in my room and not get used. I have to want to do it.
And again, the same applies for adoption of open source languages in large organizations.
There have to be not just me, but I need colleagues. I need a group of people around
that really, really wants to do this before it can happen. And those people are going to
need the knowledge, the skills, and some experience of doing so before we can do so.
So you might be the enthusiastic R user or Python user within your company,
but you need people around you who also have that enthusiasm and the knowledge and skills.
And for those who don't, we're going to need to train them. Even those who do have that knowledge
are going to need further training and to develop new skills, things they wouldn't have even thought
about if they were just using R to do statistical analyses. The rollout of R at an enterprise level
takes new skills and new knowledge that has to be built.
So we need a core group of people who are enthusiastic, they want to do this,
they have the right skills, and then we get on to sponsorship. So this is probably about the
furthest I'm going to push the climbing analogy, but when people go and climb Everest, they don't
just go climbing, they don't buy the equipment and set out. They have sponsorship. They need
insurance, they need all these other things paid for by someone. They need that sponsor
behind them to make that mission happen. And again, it's the same when we're talking about
enterprise adoption of languages like R and Python. We need the senior leaders. We need
somebody who is going to A, pay for all of the equipment for us to get us going, and we need
people who will not just put the equipment in place so it can sit in the closet. We need people
who will drive that and encourage or enforce the usage of these tools, these languages in
practice. So it needs to all align. And even if we have all of that, we still need the right
conditions before we can move forward. So the climbing analogy would be the weather. We need
the right time of year. We're not going to go in a blizzard. But again, in our industry, we felt
that time was 2017 to go. So we're talking about years and not months or days here. But we need
the external industry conditions to be right. There's a reason why I'm talking to you about
this now and not in 2005. For GSK, this started in 2017. For other companies, it may have started
earlier or later. But broadly speaking, this is where we feel we got off to something. And if I
step away from the climbing analogies for a second and break this down to what it actually
meant in practice for us, this slide is here to represent our open source journey. And if I go
from top to bottom in these rows, we've got the systems and the processes that I've mentioned a
couple of times already that we've put in place. We've got training. And then we've got the pilots
that we ran with people doing the job on the ground. And lastly, we have the tools that were
needed to be put in place. So all of these different elements have combined. And before
I hand over to Ben and Becca to dive into a little bit more of the detail around this, I just want to
flag a couple of things I've mentioned once or twice, which is the systems and the processes
that we put in place. So I did say I really, really like this webinar series. If you go back
far enough through the history of these webinars with Posit, you'll find one from me in another
couple of colleagues at GSK talking about one of the systems that we put in place, our R platform
version 1, as I put it on here. This is a system we built called Warp, which uses a lot of the
Posit products to create that starting point. On our installation, where users can log in,
there's several hundred packages already available to them to use. So they don't have to go out to
CRAN and install R and install all those packages one by one on the laptop. It provides that
consistency and user experience and can be supported at the enterprise level. So I'm not
going to talk in any more detail about that because we've covered it in a lot of detail, and I'd
encourage you to go back through the back catalog and find that. But that was a key, key component
for getting us started. So we got the right tools in place. The other component Phil actually
mentioned in his introduction, which was the external factors, something like the R validation
hub, which I had the pleasure of leading for three or four years. The R validation hub was
something that started around about the start of that era, sort of 2018, 2019 time, and was a
collaboration across industry whereby lots of pharmaceutical companies got together and started
tackling the question of, well, if there's 20,000 packages on CRAN, how do I know whether they all
do what I expect them to? How do I choose the right packages to help me with my analysis?
And that can be for the regulators and in a regulatory environment like we have
at GSK, but this can be in any industry. If you need to be sure that the packages you're
choosing, the packages you're installing centrally, do what you expect, what processes can you put
them through in order to check that and make sure your users aren't running code that gives
them the wrong result? The R validation hub produced white paper, and we took that internally,
and the R for GXP label on here is a process that we've built that adapts the thinking behind that
white paper. So we put those things in place, and I'll just talk about those lightly because
they're really, really key components. And with those two key components, we got to the point
where through various different pilots, we got to the point where, like some of the presentations
that I mentioned recently from our industry peers, we had our full pilot study in R. All of the code,
100% of the code produced in our study, written in the R language, which is a fantastic milestone.
But bear in mind, at the enterprise level, we maybe have 50 or 60 studies reporting every year.
To go from that one study to the many, many studies takes a different kind of journey,
and I'm going to hand over to Ben at this point to talk about how we went from some
of these early pilots into the wider scale adoption.
Awesome. All right, perfect. Thanks, Andy. So as Andy mentioned, we did some pilots. Now what?
How do we go from that sort of kind of old boots, old trusty boots to a more expansive hike?
Well, we did what we thought, what worked last time. We decided to do a lot of training. So we
created large in-person training initiatives and classes, and we provided that training
and created training documentation for study teams. And I think at one point within GSK
Biostats, we got up to the point where we had trained 80% or more of all individuals
in the organization with like an intro to tidyverse training. And so our thought was, great,
we've done, we've got, we've touched a lot of individuals to do training. We have given them
documentations. Study teams would begin to use R and create their outputs because that's what
happened last time. But the issue is it didn't quite work. And so one of the things that we did
was we had to reflect. And the thing that we realized is the distance, the time period between
an R training class and when you could use an R, when you could use R on a new study was like
something around 12 to 18 months. And if anyone's experienced that sort of gap in terms of learning
something and then trying to apply what you've learned, you very quickly realized you're going
to forget everything and you have to redo that training on the fly. So one of our biggest insights
was similar to mountaineering. You don't learn how to climb from a book. You don't learn R from
a book. You actually have to apply it. And so that's when we decided to think about, okay,
what do we need to do? What are the transition, what's the transition that we need to make?
So during our reflection period, there's a couple of things that we realized. One,
not all study teams adopt and transition to R at the same time. And so that's similar to
that 12 to 18 month timeline that I showed. So it often requires retraining on the use of R.
Study teams have different needs according to their timelines. Also, the training needs to be
a major focus for study teams and how we train those individuals is important for success.
So for example, if a study team already has some R experience, why do they need to go through an
intro to tidy verse training again? Maybe they need something more advanced. The other thing
that was happening while we were making this transition was a lot of those R experts actually
sat outside the business and sort of a center of excellence. They didn't sit on the pipeline.
So we looked at these kind of like insights and we decided that we needed to make a change.
We needed to change our strategy for how it is that we do training. So what did we do?
We decided to say, no more classes. We're going to move all our training into on-demand training
and documentation. And then what we decided to spend most of our effort is actually focused
on supporting and mentoring individuals in biostats. So how did we do that? We created
a team called Accelerate R, which is basically a small agile pod of R experts that literally
goes and sits side-by-side with study teams to train them on R. If you're kind of curious about
how we did this, I did have a more in-depth presentation on Accelerate R at PositConf.
I've dropped the link in the slides. But that is what we decided to do.
So what does a general kind of Accelerate R initiative look like when we sit side-by-side?
It's not just we drop in and we just help them. We actually have kind of a set process. And this
is the process. I realize it's very, there's a lot of words here on the screen. So I'm going
to walk you through it. First thing that we do is we help individuals with prereqs,
getting system access, GitHub or SCE, making sure that they've done like an intro to R
training, as well as then figuring out sort of what is the availability of the engagement of
a team. If there's not a ton of availability for the team to actually work with us and sit
side-by-side, we won't do it because we don't think there's a lot of value in trying to upskill
that team because they all need to be there and available and engaged. Next, we do a bunch of
onboarding. So basically it's a week of training where we focus on either GitHub ways of working,
delivery specific R packages. Sometimes we touch on Agile and Agile ways of working,
but really what we're focusing on is like how do they deliver the set of agreed upon
deliverables using R. We then go through a process of doing delivery. We like to basically
associate or what we like to do is assign deliverables to kind of sprints or two-week
intervals and then we help the study team actually deliver those. This could be the where we create
templates, we do code review, we do training on specific new nuance or niche packages, or even
just kind of general like overview of understanding of tools within GSK. And then finally after we do
that delivery, we have a closeout. And this was really important for us to be able to document
a lot of example code and templates. And it's helped us as an organization because one of the
things that R and open source technologies kind of we're trying to battle or have an uphill
walk against is we have a ton of historical legacy code libraries and it's very easy to
go and pull code from there in order to do things fast. We needed to be able to create
sort of like example code and templates that study teams could then refer to using R to be able to
kind of catch up and utilize the same speed. One of the things that we learned during Accelerate R
is the learning curve is incredibly steep, especially with R as well as some of the other
pieces of technology that we're introducing like Git or GitHub. So this is a graphic I like to
show to explain sort of what is our experience oftentimes with study teams. If you look at time
and confidence, over time people become more and more confident until they've reached
kind of like a peak and then all of a sudden they have to dive into like the internals of an R
package and then they kind of deep dive and spiral down because they're like, oh no, I have
actually no idea what I'm doing. And that's fine. We like to make sure that individuals
are there and supported, but we know that there is going to be a steep learning curve.
So we started Accelerate R and we had some really good success over about two years. And one of the
things that we realized doing Accelerate R is that we needed to evolve. We needed to evolve
because we realized that training was helpful, but the true impact that study teams needed was
they needed their obstacles removed. So we needed to change the role of Accelerate R.
So similar to the old boots and, you know, I'm sure the boots that, you know, Tenzing Norgay and
Eamon Hillary were using to climb Mount Everest, we needed to change. We needed to partner with
the R engineering team to bring real-time insights and feedback from study teams to that R engineering
team in order to create those tools to enable study teams. And that was crucial for us as an
organization because it helped us to remove obstacles quickly for study teams instead of
having long cycles of development. So supportive mentoring is great. I love it. I've spent a lot
of time doing it, but really to achieve enterprise adoption, it's not purely only supportive
mentoring. You actually need to deliver the right tools to study teams and individuals in order for
them to create their outputs. So going back to, you know, Andy's chart of we have the R platform,
we have the processes, and we, you know, have the supportive mentoring, we need the tools.
So I'm going to hand it over to Becca, who's going to talk about sort of this
last work stream around supporting tools and again and again over time.
Great. Thank you, Ben. All right. So I sit on our engineering team, and as Ben mentioned at the end
of his section, we started to collaborate with the Accelerate R team to provide a better support
model for our study teams. And what we found is our teams are really eager to use the latest and
greatest tools that are available in open source. They're really excited. But with new things come,
you know, inevitable roadblocks to try to implement them in your traditional workflows.
So as an engineering team, our overarching goal is to assess those roadblocks when they come up
and try to create tools and solutions to help people move forward. So I'm going to talk a little
And when I talk about roadblocks, what do I mean exactly? We have this vast open source ecosystem
available at our fingertips, tons and tons of R packages these days. And in pharma in particular,
we have an ecosystem called the Pharmaverse, which is a whole variety of
So really, there's no better time than now to start using R in our study work.
But every organization is a little bit different. Every study is a little bit different.
Every data sets a little bit different. And so, you know, gaps in functionality do come up.
And when we, you know, the Accelerate R team encounters a gap in functionality,
a tool doesn't quite do exactly what we need it to do. The engineering team, we come
try to assess the situation and figure out, okay, what do we have that's working well,
and where do we need to, to augment and kind of build some more things around it.
And next, I want to talk about a particular use case, a particular situation that came up
that led us to build a new tool. So we were in a situation a year or two ago,
where GSK had created and made available as first production environment for R. So this is the
R for GXP effort that Andy had mentioned at the top. We call these production environments for
our frozen environments because their contents are carefully assessed and curated, tested,
and then ultimately put in an environment that's locked down and users can't modify it.
So these frozen environments are set up exactly for production work.
And a study team came into Accelerate R, and they were ready to use R in production.
And one of the initial tasks in the clinical reporting workflow is preparing datasets.
And there's a really standard type of dataset transformation that is made much easier by an
R package in the Pharmaverse called Admiral. So Admiral helps support this very standard dataset
transformation step. This team was ready to use that package, but they were also interested in
an extension of that package that was a little bit newer, called Admiral Onco. This team was
an oncology team, they were working on an oncology study. So Admiral Onco added, you know, some extra
bits that would be useful for them specifically. When they inquired about this package, we were
excited to tell them that it would be coming available in the next frozen environment. So
every frozen environment, we're adding a little bit more, we're making it a little bit better,
but they take time. They take time and effort to create. And so that means waiting a number of
months in between. It turned out that this team could, they could wait for their final deliverables.
They were far out enough that using the future frozen environment would be suitable. But they
had a lot to do and they needed to get started now. They needed to get started programming.
So this is actually the first time the engineering team was brought in to, as part of the Accelerate
R model, to talk with this team and figure out how we can support them in the meantime, as they
kind of wait for this future frozen environment, but not get stalled as they're waiting and continue
to move forward. So in discussing with this team what they might need, first and foremost, we,
you know, reproducibility, reproducible code, a reproducible environment. Now, they're not able
to use a frozen environment. They need to be installing and managing packages themselves
in an open R environment. So reproducibility is really critical to ensure that all of their code
runs smoothly between folks and both now and in the future. And RM is great for reproducibility.
They needed to know which packages were okay to use and which packages would be available in the
next frozen environment and then easy access to those packages. Posit package manager plays a
critical role in this piece. This is really important. This team is trying to work towards
something in the future. So they need the ability to smoothly move forward and then have a nice,
smooth transition over to that environment when it's ready. CRAN snapshots are one of the many
pieces that help us here. And then finally, you know, with a team that's newer to R, newer to
environment management, we need to make this easy for them and help them stay on track, not use
packages they shouldn't be using, making sure that, again, their transition to that frozen environment
is smooth. We want to make sure what they're using in their interim environment matches and aligns as
closely as possible with that future frozen environment. So all of these bits and pieces
wrapped up into a new package we created called Slushy. So Slushy, its name is inspired by the
fact that it's a frozen environment in a way, but melted down a little bit because we're adding a
little bit more flexibility. And the workflow for Slushy looks something like this. At the start of
the study, the team, or when they're ready to start programming, the team initialized Slushy
with the packages they needed to a particular CRAN snapshot. And every so often, an update is
performed to kind of slide that CRAN snapshot forward bit by bit until they didn't need to
anymore, because the next frozen environment, its snapshot was decided, and then they could just
kind of coast to the end, and their environment was more or less matching. To support them
throughout this process, I'll just highlight one of the supports in Slushy. If you're curious about
more details, I did present on Slushy at PositConf 2023, so you can check out that talk if you're
interested. But one of the areas we tried to support is just helping people through this
process of anything that, any updates that might occur that could impact their code. As we all
know, you know, open source is moving very quickly. Packages update, new features come, things change.
And so, if they're able to anticipate any code changes before, during, after updates, that's
really, really helpful. So, they can adjust along the way. So, we created Slushy for this particular
case, but it turned out this was a pretty common scenario, and we're continuing to find new
cases, new uses for Slushy to this day. So, it's a pretty common solution for the mix of
stability and flexibility. And Slushy is just one example of many of kind of tools and
solutions we've built in the moment for our teams to close these technical gaps.
But if we kind of pause along our journey, and this day-to-day work, and look around, what we see is
there's actually some other unexpected gems. So, there's a little more that meets the eye, because
we have the whole open source world. And the more that we lean into it, the more we kind of discover
these gems. And so, next I'm going to talk to you about some of the other sort of side effects of
our open source journey, and some of the other benefits we're realizing along the way.
So, one benefit, you know, when we bring the engineering team into the Accelerate R model,
we're bringing this on-demand support to the teams, which is really great. But we're also
bringing the tool developers and the teams much closer together. So, what that means is
they're getting more insight. The teams are getting more insight into our development process.
They're understanding how we iterate on functionality, and where we store the code.
If they, they're of course valuable users, and they're testing things out as they go,
or they're stress testing the tools. So, if they encounter something that's not working quite right,
or not as expected, we work with them, and we determine is, you know, maybe they found a bug,
and we can thank them for that, and help them understand how to file that as an issue.
So, this is also, you know, increased exposure, and building data science skills for our study
teams, which is really great, and we feel this helps us bring more contributors out into the
open source world. Another benefit is the growth of our tools. So, Slushy, if we go back to Slushy,
we created this as an internal tool for our internal needs, but we discovered that it was
pretty useful internally, and that inspired us to consider maybe Slushy is actually useful for
the industry. After all, the industry's trying to adopt open source, and everyone's trying to
bridge together stability and flexibility. So, we decided to open source Slushy, and put it on our
public GitHub, and what that allowed us to do is, of course, welcome in new users, but also
open up the dialogue, and engage with other organizations about this scenario, and how best
to deal with it, and also engage with Posit, who's building important pieces of infrastructure, like
Posit Package Manager, and RN, just so we can share our needs back, and again, open up this
dialogue for how best to solve this. More broadly, we try to ask ourselves this question a lot of,
you know, have we built something? Would it be useful outside of GSK? And sometimes, the answer
is no. Sometimes, we're building something that's really specific to us, and there's no reason to
share it, but oftentimes, we are solving problems that are common to others as well. Going back to
the Pharmaverse, that's a really great example of people committing to open source to solve
these common problems. So, we go through this exercise often. When we create something, is there
a benefit to others? If so, what do we gain by sharing? If we decide to put our package out in
the world, or maybe just contribute to an existing open source package, instead of building our own
thing? And something, you know, there's a lot that can be gained, more users, more stress testing of
the tool that's ultimately making it better, but also increased insights, and increased perspective
into what, you know, what things that we're not considering. Ultimately, you know, we feel
really strongly about contributing to open source, because we've seen how those contributions really
pay off, not just for us, but for our industry as a whole. And finally, I want to mention, this is
really important, that open source is not just packages to us. Open source also means shared
access to information. I've talked a lot about how we're trying to close technical gaps with the
Accelerator model. We're trying to help people use packages, figure out where the gaps are.
There's also an opportunity to close gaps in knowledge. The best way to solve problems, or
for example, or this particular working group, a model of sharing information that I want to
highlight that does this really, really well, is KAMIS. KAMIS is a is a working group that we,
we at GSK, we have involvement in co-leading. So what KAMIS puts out in the world is
example code for how to do statistical analyses in different programming languages, and also
what might be different between them, because there's a lot of nuances, there's a lot of
differences that do pop up. And the process to research them and figure out what might be
different or the same is quite time consuming and tedious and requires a lot of expertise at times.
So KAMIS is a nice model that's, that's, the resources are really, really building. And
it's an example of how you can put in a little bit, a small investment, but getting a big reward
on the other side. Because if everyone contributes a little bit, then we have this
nice, big shared repository that that is, has better longevity.
So with the Accelerator and engineering teams, working together with study teams, we're able to
better close gaps that come up along the way. And then together with the open source community,
we can better conquer the divide. And all of these pieces between all of these support layers and,
and layers of engaging with the community, we feel that they're all really, really important
for our overall success. So next, I will pass it to Andy, who's going to remind everyone
of where GSK is and where we hope to go in the near future.
Thank you. Thank you, Becca. So yeah, before we go into the Q&A, just got a couple of slides to
round off. And here's one that I shared earlier. So a year ago, our biostatistics leadership team
committed to these, these two pieces. And hopefully, over the last half an hour, 45 minutes,
you've seen, you've seen some of the things that we've done to get us to this point around, around
a year ago. So all central tools using R and 50% of our code by the end of 2025. I think where we're
at today, a year on from when these commitments were made is in a very, very good position. I
think we will easily hit 50%, probably exceed it. And then we'll see where we go beyond,
beyond that. So it's really, really nice to be in that position. And it's thanks to all the kind of
all of these various different components and things that we've put in place at the enterprise
level to get us there. I wanted to finish with this, with this last slide. I really, I'm obsessed
clearly with mountaineering, the one more mountaineering slide would, would work. I like
this for two reasons. One, it's, it's showing that the summit is in sight, you know, we are
through the point where most of the key issues that we could foresee have been, have been dealt
with. We've, we've prepared, we've got to a point where we're, we're almost there. Now, we haven't
had studies with every regulator submitted with every regulator around the world. We haven't
tried every type of statistical model and run that in our, everything we've ever done in,
in SAS or in anything else. But we are, through things like KAMIS, we have,
that Becca was just talking about, we have the tools we need for, for that second part of the
question. We have the kinds of, the kinds of answers that we can give to anybody who's scrutinizing
what we do. So I think barring extreme bad weather at this point, we're, we're really
confident of making it to the top. The other reason I wanted to finish on the, on this slide
is the path. You can see lots of climbers, and if you've got good eyesight or a big screen,
you can probably see some more climbers further along, or even that way up to the, the top of
the summit. And as people tread this path time and time again, the path gets more worn, it gets
more clear, it's more obvious for others to follow. And it's been a real pleasure to kind of
come and present today and share what we've done. And I mentioned at the start, we really, really
like seeing all of the other presentations that, that Posit have put on with, with others from,
not just from the pharmaceutical industry, but from all industries, because it shows how people
are making their own, their own journeys. And this kind of information, putting it out there,
as Becca said, again, sharing that with the, sharing these kinds of stories, sharing the
kinds of tools that we build, helps others on that path. And when you get that groundswell of people,
all kind of pulling in the same direction at the industry level, that's the kind of stuff
that feeds back in and helps us internally follow that lead and, and get there as well.
So whilst others hopefully will learn some things from the presentation that we've given today,
equally, we enjoy seeing the other presentations because there's always things we learn
that will help as well. And that really is what all of the, the open source spirit and the move,
move is all about is, is that kind of sharing and learning for the sort of the greater good.
So on that note, I will, I will finish or we will finish generally, and we'll move over to questions.
All right. Awesome job. It's, it's great to feature the work that your team is doing,
because so many pharmaceutical companies reach out and they're looking for, you know,
blueprints or advice on the change management. And I feel like I'm just constantly sharing
your team's conference talks in various ways through emails. And so I'm so glad that we
can tell the story and show how leadership commitment, how user training, how package
development can all come together to help support the transition to open source. And so we have a
flood of questions that have been coming in. And so let's go ahead and tackle some of these and
we'll see how far we get. So I really liked this first question because I get a lot of questions
around the why and how for open source. And so right off the bat, someone says,
what was the initial driver to move towards open source?
So the joke answer to this is that I rejoined GSK in 2017, which was the start of the
timeline. So I was one of those kickers, but I'd go back to that slide that I shared in the
introduction where we had, I listed out all the things you need in place. You know, you need the
tools, the equipment, the people. So I guess I was one of those enthusiastic people who wanted to
make the journey. But we also had one of the key components was our head of programming at the time
decided that they were on board and they'd seen the conditions across industry. They'd
seen what other groups were talking about, thinking about, and asked if this was the right
time, could we do this? Could we put these measures into place? And they were quite proactive in
setting objectives to our programs at the time, which is 400, 500, 600 people saying, we want you
to start learning R. We want to progress beyond where we are today. And this is a future vision
for us. So that sponsorship line that I put up was really, really important as well. And of course,
all of that was the external influence, the weather, as I put it before, all of that stuff
was influencing at the same time, along with things like the need to, we were doing a lot
more Bayesian analysis at the time. So R was starting to be used there, but we didn't have
the right systems. People were unable to run the kind of code, the simulations on their laptops.
So we needed the systems as well. So all of the kind of several components all kind of came
together at once. And that's why I really emphasize, it's the right time. No one thing
will help you make this journey. You need a lot of different things aligning at the same time.
You know, it's amazing. If you look at the presentations by Roche, by Novo, Nordisk,
and yours, there was some magic in the air around 2017, 2018. It's when R and Pharma came about,
the R Validation Hub. It was definitely a turning point, I think, for a lot of groups.
So to keep the questions going, we got the second one here. Why did GSK choose R
over other scripting languages like Python or Julia? What do you think?
So I can take this one. I'll let Ben and Becca come in on these questions,
so you're not just all hearing from me. So for those who don't know our industry well,
I talk about statisticians, programmers, and data scientists. Obviously, Python is a really,
really big language in data science. But a lot of the core part of what we're delivering within
biostatistics is not predictive models. I mentioned several hundred outputs, potentially,
that we will produce on a clinical study. A lot of that analysis is pre-planned,
and it's statistical analysis at its core. And R is, as everyone knows, a very, very strong
language for statistics. That's what it was built for. And so the latest methods and tools tend to
be developed in R first before they appear, potentially, in other languages as well. So
R is a natural point to go to. And if you're hiring statisticians, most statisticians these
days are trained in R at university, at college. So they pick it up, and they input into industry.
So that's one of the core reasons. To the point around the faster languages,
I mean, yeah, sure, we see Python used heavily where we do have predictive modeling questions.
That's increasingly a push. When we're getting into generative AI, Python will come up. So it's
mainly for the core deliverables where R is the focus. But I guess, although I said speed is
really, really important, I'm talking about speed. Maybe we should have had a picture of a glacier,
because a drug, from molecule to market, is 15 years. So when I talk about speed,
I'm not talking about real time. Something needs to be there like that. We're talking about speed
in terms of, can I shave days off? So the speed difference in the languages is not really
as important as it is if you're doing fast on the fly analytics. It's important, but not quite as
important as it might be elsewhere. Can I also jump in on this one real fast?
The other thing that's important that you have to remember is it's really hard to train people on
one language. If you're going to start making them other languages as well, you're just boiling
the ocean. And at a certain point, you have to make a decision on where you're going to go.
So it's really important. Again, this journey started in 2017. In 2017, R was the appropriate
language for those statistical components. So it's an important thing to remember. You're
transitioning 1,000 plus people. It's really hard to have multiple things and to keep those things
aligned. Well, let's keep the questions coming. So Andy, you and your team has been so impactful
on the package side, the validation side. We've got a question here on, how does GSK
manage packages? Do you have your own package repository that everyone uses the same versions
of every package? One of you want to tackle this question.
I can try to take this one. Sure. I think maybe some of this was part of my section, but
we do have package manager accessible to everyone. But I think the important part of this one
is the production or DXP environment. So these are the frozen environments.
These environments have everything pre-installed. So there's no deviating from it. It's just you
use that environment and you use what's in it. And that's already been kind of decided and curated.
So there's no variation there. For Slushy, we're helping people manage out in the open environment
so that they can eventually get there. So we're trying to give them similar controls and help
them better manage the packages that they should be using and the versions and everything. So that's
another option that we think of as a little bit more of an intermediate solution. And then for
a playground, I mean, I suppose anyone can use what they want, more of a playground environment.
But yeah, the main answer is those frozen environments have everything pre-installed.
What does it look like if someone requests a new package or wants to add a package?
What is that process like?
I'm sure if she's...
Yeah, we lost Becca temporarily.
Maybe.
Ben, do you want to take this? You were involved in the early part of that process.
Sure. So the way that we do get a package into a frozen R environment is the package typically
goes through what's known as an endorsement process, which is basically a quick glance
at the package to say, all right, does this package actually meet our business needs from
a strategy point of view? And do we believe it makes sense from a risk point of view?
One of the things that we're looking for from that, and the primary place that these packages
are brought up by the business, it's not brought up by a central team. So it's totally business
driven, which is a really important component to make sure that we get the right tools for the
right study teams. What we're looking for often is if someone proposes a specific stats methodology.
Like one example I'm thinking about right now is all the different R
stand interface libraries. Do we want to select one? R stand versus command stand R versus R stand
arm versus BMRS, et cetera. Do we want to choose one? Do we want to let everyone just pick which
one they want to use? And we'll make a decision. From there, if it's going to be used for creation
of outputs to a regulatory, it then goes into our validation assessment process, which then it
goes through basically a package assessment in order to get included into the frozen R environment.
And Becca, it seems like you're back. You lost connection.
It's okay.
Yeah, but I see you filling in that info about how we select. So caught the end of that. Thank you.
So let's go to another question here. I think is a topic that's been coming up
more often is could you share more about the code review sessions and what that's like?
Yeah. So code review sessions I think are like really crucial, especially if you are helping
teams transition from other tools into our other open source languages. I think the most important
thing about a code review session is you have to upfront declare a norm on the fact that this is
not going to be used for performance evaluations. I think one of the things that we have noticed
culturally sometimes is that people will look at code review as a negative performance indicator.
It is not. It is how we all get better and how we all improve our capability. So it also depends on
once you've kind of established that norm, then you can set up your code review sessions.
There's different ways that you can do it. You can do large drop in sessions where people bring
problems and then you work through the problems all together or do a session where you're all
reviewing each other's work in a larger group. You can do one-on-one if individuals prefer to
have that kind of one-on-one intimacy. It really depends on the user on the study team and like
what it is that they are comfortable with. The big things that we're looking for in code review
sessions are, and this might sound dumb for people, but it is a problem that we face very frequently,
is are people actually using packages? So one of the things I will often see
is an individual will write a custom function to deal with like dates when they could just
literally use like functions that are available within tidyverse. So we are always looking at
things like how do we help improve like speed efficiency? How do we help individuals realize
that, you know, this really hard thing that I'm trying to do with date time, there's a whole suite
of functions within tidyverse that I can do, that I can use. And that's the type of thing that
we typically look for. If the users are more advanced, maybe we're looking at like how do we
deal with like code performance when it relates to Bayesian statistical analysis. That's a really
hard thing that you have to do. You need a lot of like expertise. So code review, I guess long
story short, code reviews are the full gamut. But at the end of the day, the very first thing you
need to do is norm on the fact that this is not for performance review or have any impact on
performance. It's just how do we improve our deliverables as a whole? I feel like the next
question is coming off of that. You know, what R training did you plan? Was it standardized
tidyverse training? Was there specific GSK training? And then I like the last part of this
too, because I've seen some interesting things recently by some of the other pharmas of opening
up their curriculum and making it available on GitHub. And they're asking is your training
publicly available and things like that? Yeah, it's a good question. So the way that we approach
it with Accelerate R and maybe we create too much work for ourselves is we make it really truly
bespoke based off study team. So if a study team is kind of like lower maturity in R, like they've
never really used R before, we will only touch basics. So we will do things like tidyverse
training. We utilize some of the intro to tidyverse on the tidyverse website, but we took some of that
training and like made it more GSK specific like situations that you'll encounter. But it really
kind of just it depends. So and then we'll touch things like pharmaverse and we'll do like
introduction to some of those pharmaverse packages and utilize some of the guides that are available
there. But it's really kind of like an interactive session where we go through that code. If a team
has like really high maturity, maybe we'll go into like some super deep niche topics, things like
that. So it really depends. We try to make it really bespoke based off study team. Yeah, we lose
some of the standardization to make it easier. But I personally think the costs outweigh the benefits
because of like you are truly addressing study team needs and not just kind of like giving a
blanket thing. And that goes into that source support and mentoring. In terms of like open
sourcing and publicly available, I don't think we've ever, I don't think we've made it publicly
available. I know we've done like workshops at different conferences and things like that where
we've done like this is like how you create a table, things like that. So I know, Becca, you just
did one in rpharma. We've done some at Fuse. We've done some at Posit. So like there's a lot of
different things. But like in terms of like the actual like training package or book down,
no, that is not publicly available. It's funny you say that because one of the most popular
workshops at rpharma was a workshop taught by Christina and Ellis on clinical workflows,
freely available, all the content on Posit Cloud on YouTube. So that makes a lot of sense. So we're
down to the last five minutes. So we'll just do some rapid fire and just feel free to see how many
questions we can get in. So the next one, I think, is a quick one. It says, did the statistical
programming team also move from SAS to R or was it just the statisticians? Yeah, I mean, I covered
this slightly by saying in response, I think, to the first question, because the one of the
original kickers was the push within programming, which is perhaps unusual because most of the time
it's the statisticians who really kick off that drive to R. So, yeah, absolutely. The programming
team have also moved. When I say biostatistics, it's a thousand statisticians and programmers,
data scientists, the majority of those being programmers. So, yeah, this is universal for GSK.
Fantastic. So I like this question because it comes up for me quite a bit. How are KPIs
and incentives structured to drive the R adoption at GSK?
I can try to take that one. Yeah. So we've had different iterations of KPIs and incentives and
things like that. Initially, for a lot of our pilots and initial work, the incentives were
people who were just highly motivated. And those are the individuals you need initially to sort of
be champions and be able to help drive change. It sounds like a little soft and wishy-washy,
but that is truly important in order to be able to kind of get things kicked off. You need highly
motivated people who want to do it. In terms of KPIs and incentive things like that, we've done
a lot of different types of tracking. We have this concept called QC, quality control, where
basically you double program a lot of your outputs. So we used to track people doing
KC as sort of like our first initial metric because we wanted to know sort of how were
people using QC. Because it's not like a production environment, it's a lot of a lower barrier of
entry. So that was kind of one of our first things. We've also done a lot of different things where,
as I mentioned, we've tapped into the...or we've started to use Git and GitHub for our
version control. We have figured out ways to use the GitHub API to pull metrics on what studies
they're using R, how many people are...or what's the percentage of R per study, different things
like that. And so we have different KPIs and metrics. But at the end of the day, the thing
that matters most is kind of that commitment that Andy mentioned in the beginning. It's 50%
code, period. That is the commitment. I'm sure we have stretch goals, but at the end of the day,
that's our baseline, 50%. And so that is the KPI we now are working against.
So there's a ton of comments coming in about Shiny. So I'd hate to miss the opportunity to
not gravitate towards that a bit. Ben and Becca, is there trainings around Shiny? Is that...I've
seen the work on the drug discovery side with Teal. Does that come up for you as well on
the late-stage arena? Yeah, I know we've only got like a minute or so officially on the timing we're
working towards, but very quickly on Shiny, it is used quite extensively in GSK. And actually,
one of the other components maybe that I didn't touch on in the presentation, which we often talk
about is that desire to move to open source in the first place. Yes, we did it. And we've talked a
lot about the how, but there's going to be the why in the first place. And something like Shiny is
one of those reasons to move across. So to move from the idea of static reporting, very tables
focused into better graphics in R generally with things like ggplot, and the interactive
potential that Shiny has. And that's been really, really powerful. And Ben has been leading one of
our initiatives internal called quantitative decision-making, where Shiny is a core component
in helping our statisticians work with study teams to make decisions about which trials to
move ahead with and which not to based on the probability of success of that trial. So Shiny
is a kind of a communication tool that's been really, really powerful and an important part of
our journey in selling the end vision and goal. We can talk about things like Shiny for
submissions and so on, but that would be a nice too, I think, in future. But for us, Shiny has
been more about like, oh, why bother? Why go from one language to another? Well, R and Python
offer opportunities that our existing tools did not offer. And Becca, we've got a couple of
questions. I want to throw one out here because I like this package so much. Someone's asking about
Slushy. Is it a open source package? Is it available on CRAN? Can you get it off of GitHub?
Those types of things. Right now, it's on our GitHub, on the GSK Biostatistics GitHub.
So you can find that there. And I saw another question about whether you can use,
whether you need like your own package manager set up. You don't. By default, it uses the public
posit one. So it's nice that's available for us. Well, I think we're a minute over and I have
enjoyed this very much. And I think your team is doing some really awesome work in accelerating
the adoption of open source at GSK. And I'm so glad and happy to share this after this webinar
today. Any last comments or things you want to mention before we wrap up? No, just I know there
are a lot of questions. I'm glad that we've managed to spark a bit of interest. We will
work with you, Phil, I guess afterwards if there's further questions to answer, we can try and put
together something to kind of try and answer some of those additional questions that we have.
And we'll make sure everyone's got resources and links that Ben and Becca and I have talked
about throughout the presentation. But yeah, thanks again for the opportunity. It's been great.
Yeah, absolutely. Thank you. All right. Well, with that, thanks to everybody for coming.
Hopefully you have a great rest of your day or evening and we will see you next time on our
POSIT webinar.